Client issues happen.
I've had my fair share of client relationship failures and it's not always your fault.
I wanted to spend this lesson being open and honest about working with clients in a freelancing environment.
I wanted you to know that client issues will arise and knowing the best way to handle them can help
prevent the pitfalls.
I ran into in my 14 years of freelancing client situation one dear freelancer there's been a couple
of revision round so far and I'm not happy with how things are going.
You're not executing the project in the manner I was hoping and I was wanting a refund.
I'm sorry this isn't working out and I wish you the best.
Man bomber an unhappy client and they don't like my work but hey it happens.
First of all don't panic just because the client did not like your work.
It does not mean you are not right for freelancing in this area.
People are different and sometimes expectations can be mismatched one thing you could do to prevent
mismatched expectations is to be clear in the concept and brainstorming stages of your project so that
clients are never surprised later with a project with creative outcomes.
So how do we handle the situation now that it's already happened.
First of all on our contract did we have a 25 to 50 percent non-refundable deposit.
If so we get to keep that money even if the client's unhappy.
This is why we have contracts that protect ourselves from the situation.
The client knew when they signed the contract that the deposit was non-refundable and we need to kindly
remind the client of this by providing a highlighted statement in the contract.
Of course we can feel we did not live up to expectations and agree with the client.
In that case you can always refund a portion of the money in good faith and this is up to you and I've
done this a few times before.
Unlucky client situation number two.
Dear freelancer I had a stock photo company email me and say one of their photos used on my website
you made for me is in violation of their copyrights and I need to provide proof that I purchased the
stock photo.
They're asking for twelve hundred dollars if I cannot come with a receipt of purchase oh boy I've been
there and done that.
And this does happen from time to time.
If you're in a creative industry that requires you to purchase photos fonts graphics or resources make
sure you keep track of all your purchases for that client.
In some cases if you charge the client for those resources it's nice to send them a receipt of the purchase
for their records or keep those for yourself in a nice organized folder.
This can go one of two ways either you did legally purchase that photo when creating their Web site
and you have a receipt and before that to the client or you somehow forgot to purchase that photo or
assumed it was already free to use and it wasn't for that second scenario.
And yes this happened to me once I did the right thing and paid the twelve hundred dollars for illegal
use of that photo to that stock photo company.
Ouch.
It sucked big time but it was a big lesson and double checking everything I use for my projects even
if I'm kind of sure it was free to use.
You're not obligated to pay as the client is the one who is on the hook for this problem.
But since it's your fault or issue you're the one who created the website and used the photo.
It's really the right thing to do.
You can prevent all this from happening by understanding the basics of licensing for farms photos and
resources and I have lessons later on in the section that goes over just that.
Another unlucky client situation dear freelancer I'm Bob from the box dudes dot com.
A new online Web site that sells boxes for shipping to larger companies.
We're seeking out freelancers to create a brand for us that will include a logo and all items needed.
We will exchange the work you do for us for exposure with a credit on our Web site.
We may even provide you with a testimonial if the work goes well.
I look forward to hearing from you.
We contacted several freelancers and I hope you're the lucky one who gets this job.
First of all get lost.
Second of all that's a lot of work requested just to get a little line of credit somewhere.
This is called spec work or speculative work and this will be totally unpaid.
And it is not even worth emailing back.
If this was a nonprofit company maybe things will be different.
But since this is a potentially profitable business it's just a company trying to get free services
from desperate freelancers and do not feed into this client situation number four for our next client
situation.
Let's say there's been a client who has requested too many revisions.
They never seem to be able to approve or finalize the project.
You're frustrated and you don't have a formal contract that states have any revision rounds they receive.
So you cannot refer the client to a contract about revision limitations.
Now you have to deal with a situation first of all this is very common.
Clients are people and people are imperfect.
Picky clients can be dealt with but they only know they're a problem if you politely let them know as
early as possible.
Dragging the situation on can cause pain and resentment toward the client especially if they're paying
you good money.
It can make you feel trapped.
Do your client I've got your latest round of edits this morning and I wanted to make sure we're on the
same page creatively as there seems to be revisions that can be avoided with some proper discussion.
Let's schedule a phone call so we can reduce the amount of future revisions to this project.
I want to be able to deliver this project in a timely manner so making sure we talk through this will
be imperative to helping me create something for you that you're happy with.
In the end do not try to be a hero and think you can handle this with just email alone.
Sometimes it's necessary to have a phone call with a client to clear up any confusion or issues come
to the phone call with a list of questions that can help them clarify their visions or ideas and be
ready to let them know if the ideas are not possible given certain deadlines.
Being upfront about what you can deliver is imperative to building that trusting client freelancer relationship
client situation number 5 a client ghosts you ghosting or just plain disappearing can happen in some
client situations.
It's happened to me once when I did not sign a contract and two it was earlier on in the process.
There could be many reasons why they're not returning your emails or your phone calls.
Some are legitimate.
They lost a family member and they drop all work involved without contacting anyone or two they could
be unhappy with the situation and decide instead of doing the right thing and communicating this with
you they decide to just disappear hoping you just go away.
Are three their business runs out of money and they need to close down operations and quickly cut costs
and they decide to not share this with you.
It is surprising how often number three happens a lot of clients do not contact you back because they
no longer need your services in the middle of a project and they have no money to pay you for your work
so far so ghosting you are disappearing is their way of solving the issue number two and three are just
not right.
And I found this out by trying to hunt down clients who have not paid before and realize those were
the situations they were in.
First of all this is another reason why having a contract with an upfront non-refundable deposit is
helpful.
At least you get to keep some money before they disappeared secondly if you did not have a contract
or it was the project was too small to need one.
You have to admit something to yourself you cannot help the situation.
It happens.
You could spend hours tracking these clients down and sending them spiteful emails until they pay.
But there's a good chance they never will at this point.
And it's better for you to focus your energy on a new client I have wasted many hours trying to reclaim
lost money.
If the project is large enough and you've already completed thousands of dollars of work you could hire
a debt collector or sue them in small claims court.
But even those activities end up costing you so much money and time it would only be worth pursuing
for super large contracts.
Are you currently in an awkward client situation and you don't know how to proceed.
Want to share past experiences with other freelancers.
Feel free to share these situations in the Facebook group as we walk through this issue together.
There is no one client situation that's the same and sometimes we need a little extra advice or encouragement
along the way.
So I'll see you there.